Designing Graphic Interpretation

How do we interpret?
Textual
close reading
Visual / graphical
critical literacy, compositional (think museum exhibit / city tour)


The guide calls buildings / structures / features into attention that are not evident to a familiar visitor

The critical properties of diagrammatic writing
In spite of the networked condition of textual production, the design for digital platforms for daily use has hardly begun to accommodate the imaginative possibilities of constellationary composition, graphic interpretation, and diagrammatic writing.
Very few acts of composition are diagrammatic, constellationary, or associative. Fewer are visual or spatial. The predominant modes of composition in digital displays have remained quite linear, even when they have combinatoric or modular underpinnings.

Download






Upload

Mixel (1)

Creation





Potential for… 
The conventions and capacities of screen display and format features, the computationally enabled processes of analysis, and the flexibility of configuring relations and boundaries at different scales allow us to write differently and familiarly using digital media. 	                                (1) (2) (3)

Better understanding through critical diagrammatics
Integrating the computational possibilities of social media, live feed, linked and hyperlinked references and resources, data mining, and so on, makes us see the relations among units and lines of argument in diagrammatic modes.



Better understanding through critical diagrammatics
The contingent character of any act of textual production increases exponentially with the expansion of data on which it draws for its composition and display. The conditional text has become the norm.                                                 (1)      



Authorship
fluid texts of Homer
authors of the Bible
The historical (?) Shakespeare
… all examples of a more and more common condition: 
The author, proclaimed dead by post-structuralists, may become the anomaly.

Authorship – Snails




Innovations
Topic Maps
Network Diagrams
circular displays of text/trees
word clouds
mind maps
drop-downs
panels

note: relatively lame examples in this chapter



Multilinear / Nonlinear discourse
Embedding & Entangling text (= old practice in handwritten manuscripts)
Aby M. Warburg's Mnemosyne Atlas

To Dos
show uncertainty and ambiguity in digital models
model diversity
expose differences in ontologies as ideology

Qs
Will we think differently because of the ways interpretation takes shape across networked contingencies?
A return to our once-sensible reading of natural and cultural landscapes?
Why do we always seem to fall back on linear textual narrative?
What if man is a storytelling animal and there's no way graphesis can have the same cognitive efficacy?
Cf. Bruno Latour Visualization and Representation,
Hayles, K.: How we think
